A stream of research [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] has now established that research into human genes currently investigates largely those genes that were already well studied in the past. Curiously, this narrow focus can only partially be explained by the relevance of these genes toward human health or physiology [9, 13, 14] . Rather, research suggests that this narrow focus can be primarily explained by physical, chemical, and biological properties of gene products that facilitated pregenomic investigations [11] . This insight is neither unique to genes nor surprising as science is a difficult and highly competitive endeavor, and researchers can therefore find themselves picking "the lowest-hanging fruit" within their chosen scientific domain [15, 16] .
PLOS Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3001520 January 6, 2022 1 / 31 a1111111111 a1111111111 a1111111111 a1111111111 a1111111111 throughout our manuscript, introduce such earlier studies while pursuing hypotheses postulated or derived from them. Complementing these hypothesis-driven inquiries, we will also direct statistical approaches toward the available literature on human protein-coding genes.
Briefly, we will find through hypothesis-driven inquiries that early-stage research is produced by larger scientific teams, mentions more genes in titles or abstracts, and accrues more citations. However, its citation dynamics unexpectedly do not reveal a trade-off between high risks and high rewards. Nor is early-stage research separate from clinical trials. Further, we demonstrate that distinct phases of early-stage research affect citation patterns in the scientific literature differently. Through statistical analyses, we will then pinpoint the initial stage of early-stage research toward genome biology and reveal that subsequent early-stage research can be accounted for by a handful of medically important genes that have recently become investigated by scientific fields studying obesity and age-related neurological disease.
We begin our investigation by asking when the presently known and indexed genes were first highlighted in the title or abstract of a PubMed indexed publication. The construction of our database, and an evaluation of its error rates, is described in detail in the Methods section. Briefly, we find that the database should enable us to investigate early-stage research into human protein-coding genes during the past 50 years. Simultaneously, we would also like to caution readers of this manuscript that our investigation into the conditions surrounding early-stage research into human protein-coding during the past 50 years will adopt a selective and gene-centric perspective that is likely biased toward the perspective of present day USbased life scientists (see S1 Fig and "Study limitations" section).
We find that the number of newly highlighted genes increased most strongly between the mid-1990s and early 2000s (Fig 1A) . By 2018, 86% of all genes had been highlighted at least once, and 76% of all genes had been mentioned by one of their names in the title of at least 1 publication (Fig 1A) . Consistent with prior research [11] , fewer than half (48%) of all genes are highlighted on any given year, and even fewer (36%) are mentioned in titles within a given year (S2 Fig). More optimistically, however, we can now state that most human genes have at least once been highlighted in a scientific publication.
Despite restricting our analysis toward research publications with genes highlighted in their titles or abstracts, we can confirm previous findings about the temporal dynamics of research into human genes during the last 2 decades [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] and extend them to 2018. First, the number of publications highlighting a given gene correlates strongly over time (Spearman: 0.79, S3A  Fig) . Second, the number of publications per gene during this 10-year window negatively correlates with the year in which a gene was first highlighted (Spearman: −0.59, S3B Fig) . Third, starting in the late 1990s, only a vanishing fraction of gene-publication pairs published in a given year address newly (highlighted in the same year) or recently (highlighted within the past 5 years) highlighted genes ( Fig 1B) . Fourth, starting in the late 1990s, newly and recently highlighted genes became underrepresented relative to their absolute number (Fig 1C) , even when accounting for the physiological importance of genes through their loss-of-function intolerance in human populations [32] These results clearly demonstrate that during the last 2 decades, early-stage research into human genes has become a small fraction of the scientific inquiry into human genes [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] . We further anticipate that, going forward, the potential for early-stage research will continue to shrink. First, the number of human protein-coding genes is finite. Second, there already appears to be a saturation of the annual number of newly highlighted genes ( Fig 1A) . Third, by 2018, the fraction of genes that have not yet been highlighted at least once has decreased to only 2.2% of those genes that are under an extraordinary high evolutionary pressure in human populations and therefore appear particularly important to human physiology or fecundity (S2C Fig). 
As innovation within the sciences has been extensively investigated through bibliometric properties of scientific publications [35] , we will next use bibliometric properties to lead our inquiry into the conditions surrounding early-stage research into human genes. We will test 2 main hypotheses: Hypothesis 1: Early-stage research into genes is produced under distinctive conditions from research into older genes (first highlighted 6 or more years prior to given publication) and hypothesis 2: Early-stage research into genes is distinctively received by the broader scientific community.
We noted that even miniscule differences (e.g., 3% change in average number of authors) could reach statistical significance at p-values <0.01 given the large number of publications considered for statistical analysis. As such, we will generally refrain from reporting significance values. Instead, we focus our text on effect sizes, while displaying bootstrapped confidence intervals in the figures to directly convey the uncertainty surrounding our metrics.
To test the first hypothesis, we build on research suggesting that teams of different sizes produce distinct types of innovation [36, 37] . We find that until the early 2000s, the average and median number of authors on early-stage publications closely matches the average and median number of authors of publications highlighting only older genes (Fig 2A, S5A Fig) . From 2010 onward, we observe that early-stage research into genes is produced by much larger teams than observed for teams authoring publications highlighting only older genes (Fig 2A,  S5A Fig) . This increase also exceeds the increase anticipated from extrapolating from preceding increases in mean and median team sizes (Fig 2A, S5A Fig) . We thus conclude that earlystage research into genes has recently become the purview of larger scientific teams.
To continue to test the first hypothesis, we turn from authors toward their manuscripts and ask whether these manuscripts differ beyond the inclusion of novel or recent gene targets. Supporting this view, we find that since the 1970s, the average number of genes highlighted in publications that newly highlight a gene is nearly the double of the average number of genes highlighted in publications that only highlight older genes (Fig 2B) . Similarly, we observe the median number of genes to have increased too (S5B Fig). We thus conclude that manuscripts reporting on early-stage research into genes are characterized by larger scopes in terms of the number of considered genes. Our findings on team sizes and the number of genes thus lead us to conclude that our first hypothesis is correct and that early-stage research into genes is produced under conditions that differ from research on older gene targets. Share of human protein-coding genes that have been highlighted (mentioned by name in title or abstract) until the indicated year (solid) or mentioned by name in the title (dotted). (B) Share of all pairs of highlighted genes and research publications that fall onto newly highlighted genes (0 years, brown) or recently initially highlighted genes (1 to 5 years, dark orange) or old gene targets (6 or more years, light orange). Shaded area indicates 95% confidence intervals inferred by bootstrap. Year indicates center of a 3-year sliding window used for analysis. (C) Enrichment (log 2 of ratio) of annual pairs of highlighted genes and research publications relative to the number of genes falling into the categories presented in panel B. Shaded area indicates 95% confidence intervals inferred by bootstrap. Year indicates center of a 3-year sliding window used for analysis. Combines data from MEDLINE, NCBI gene and taxonomy information, gene2pubmed, and PubTator. For data underlying the figure, see https://doi.org/10.21985/ n2-b5bm-3b17.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3001520.g001
The characteristics of early-stage research into human genes are different from subsequent research To test the second hypothesis, we build on research that suggests that innovative research is rewarded with exceptional peer recognition-awards, prizes, and election to learned societies -and with increased number of citations [27, 35] . Due to data availability to us, here, we only test here whether early-stage research into human genes is more likely to become highly cited. Confirming our hypothesis, we find that since the mid-2000s, the probability of an early-stage research publication becoming highly cited was double that of publications highlighting only older genes (Fig 2C) . We can thus see that the scientific enterprise possesses mechanisms to recognize and reward innovative, early-stage research.
An increased probability for becoming highly cited could hint toward early-stage research generally being more cited. Alternatively, and consistent with the idea of novelty-pursuing research representing a trade-off between high risk and high reward, novelty-pursuing research was previously found to be accompanied by an increased variability in citation rates -leaving some publications particularly frequently cited while other publications would be particularly infrequently cited [38] . Briefly, we find support for the former possibility of earlystage research generally receiving more citations (S6A Fig), whereas-except for 3 years  around the turn of the millennium-publications on early-stage research have indistinguishable variability in citation rates (S6B Fig) .
Because recent research highlights that the number of accrued citations yields an incomplete picture of the subsequent reception of scientific work [39, 40] , we consider an alternative metric for impact. In the context of the life sciences, a group led by George Santangelo at the NIH's Office of Portfolio Analysis recently suggested to place a special emphasis on citations by clinical trials [41] . We might anticipate that early-stage research is the furthest from the development of therapies and therefore has the lowest probability to be cited by at least 1 clinical trial [42] . Revealing unexpected nuance, we find this only to be the case for publications in the period 2000 to 2009. Intriguingly, we observe that 1980s publications reporting early-stage research publications were more likely to be cited by clinical trials than publications on old gene targets (Fig 2D) . Similarly, only from the 1990s onward are publications on old gene targets cited sooner by clinical trials (S6C Fig). We conclude that the relation between early-stage research and applied research can change and that clinical trials acknowledge early-stage research.
Taking a broader view of the role of innovation within the sciences, one might consider how much new research publications uncouple subsequent scientific literature from preceding literature [36] Using the disruption index recently introduced by Funk and Owen-Smith [43] , and popularized by Wu and colleagues [36] , we observe that publications reporting on novel gene targets are only marginally (approximately 3 percentile points) more disruptive than publications reporting only on old gene targets (S6D Fig). Further, publications reporting on recent genes targets that had first been highlighted during the 5 preceding years are even approximately 15 percentile points less disruptive (S6D Fig). These results suggest that different phases of early-stage research affect the evolution of the scientific literature differently and align with the observation of research into human genes rarely turning toward novel gene targets [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] .
Still, we can conclude that, in agreement with our second hypothesis, early-stage research into human genes is distinctively received by the broader scientific community. Interestingly, we find that early-stage research into genes follows some, but not all, of the characteristics that are associated in the literature with scientific innovation and novelty.
Our preceding bibliometric analyses demonstrate that early-stage research into human genes is produced under distinct conditions and that it is distinctively received by fellow scientists. However, the preceding analysis does not identify the specific contexts under which earlystage research into genes is produced or whether these contexts change over time.
We begin our identification of contexts by inspecting scientific journals and focusing on the period 2010 to 2018. While editors working for scientific journals appear to personally value novelty [44] , the peer-reviewing process within scientific journals had been postulated to limit novelty [45] [46] [47] . First, we focus on those journals that published research on novel gene targets ( Fig 3A, S7 Fig) . We find an overall trend (gray dots) suggesting that the number of research publications reporting on novel gene targets scales with the number of research publications studying old gene targets (Spearman: 0.49, S7 Fig) . This means that, as a first approximation, early-stage research into novel gene targets tends to appear in journals that publish many papers on human genes.
Nonetheless, we find that some journals enrich for research publications on novel gene targets to an extent that is higher than anticipated by chance (red dots) (Fig 3A, S7 Fig) . Manually inspecting their identity from the 1990s onward (S7 Fig), we believe to recognize 2 groups of journals. The first group consists of journals dedicated primarily to genome biology, whereas the second consists of journals that target an interdisciplinary audience and, in the cases of Nature, Science and PNAS, also publish research beyond the life sciences. We conclude that these 2 groups of journals are particularly effective at attracting innovative research into human genes.
Next, we focus on research publications on gene targets that were first highlighted in the 5 preceding years (Fig 3B, S7 Fig) . We again find that some journals enrich for publications on early-stage research on gene targets to an extent that is higher than anticipated by chance. Again, many of those journals are directed toward genome biology, whereas a second group of journals have a greater disciplinary focus. Several of the journals in this second group relate to neurobiology and obesity ( Fig 3B) .
In contrast to the analysis for the enrichment for novel gene targets, when considering early-stage research, we find that few journals deplete for publications on early-stage research on gene targets to an extent that is higher than anticipated by chance (cyan dots) ( Fig 3B, S7  Fig) . Most seem to focus on cancer biology, but a noteworthy exception is the Genetics and Molecular Research journal (Genet Mol Res), which had been listed on Beall's list of potential predatory journals [48] .
Comparing the extent to which journals enrich for newly highlighted versus recently highlighted genes, we find that journals dedicated to neurobiology and obesity are enriching for recently highlighted genes to a larger extent than their enrichment for newly highlighted genes ( Fig 3C) . We conclude that while there are strong similarities for the publishing contexts that surround newly and recently highlighted genes, some research fields might be more receptive toward publishing research publications on gene targets that had been identified recently. Expanding on the latter insight, we will return to research into genome biology, neurobiology, and obesity in later sections of this manuscript.
We round off our identification of specific contexts that may support early-stage research by turning toward institutions. We consider funding agencies, distinct funding mechanisms, and NIH-supported research organizations (Fig 4, S8-S11 Figs) .
The contexts implicated through funding agencies resemble those presented among journals-with the support for early-stage research between 2010 and 2018 preferentially stemming from genome biology (NIH's National Human Genome Research Institute [NHGRI]one of several different agencies within the NIH), generalist funding agencies (NIH's National Note that for any given journal, the enrichment may not be statistically significant for both axes. Notably, the light cyan quadrant shows journals that are depleted from early-stage research. Note also that circles for the journals Neurocase and Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener are plotted "outside of the range of the axis" because they do not have any publication on new gene targets. Journals above dashed line enrich for recent gene targets at least twice as much as they do for novel gene targets. Combines data from MEDLINE, NCBI gene and taxonomy information, gene2pubmed, and PubTator. For data underlying the figure, see https://doi.org/10.21985/n2-b5bm-3b17. In line with a prior study that reported that Howard Hughes Medical Institute Investigators may be more willing to change their research focus [27] , we also find that publications supported by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute are enriched for early-stage research (Fig 4A-4C, S8 Fig) . Finally, we also observe that publications authored by NIH intramural scientists are enriched for early-stage research.
We find that preferences of funding agencies toward early-stage research can be dynamic (S8 Fig) . While the NIH's NHGRI and NIGMS have consistently supported researchers producing publications enriched for early-stage research, the NIH's National Cancer Institute (NCI) supported researchers producing publications enriched for early-stage research in the 1980s and 1990s, but since 2010 has been supporting researchers producing publications depleted for early-stage research (S8 Fig) . This change contrasts with the funding patterns of Cancer Research UK, which has consistently supported researchers producing publications enriched for early-stage research (Fig 4B-4D, S8 Fig) . This shows that the focus on early-stage research among domain-specific funding agencies can differ across countries and can change over time as those agencies reassess and reprioritize the areas of research they will pursue.
Funding agencies can allocate their funds through a plethora of distinct mechanisms, which vary in the scope of eligible scientists and research organizations, the duration of the support, amount of funding, and objective of the supported research. Because of data availability, we will again focus on the NIH, which informs on its different funding mechanisms through "activity codes." Overall, we find 112 different activity codes to have been used within 2010 and 2018, of which only 8 support publications that significantly enrich for early-stage research (S9 and S10A Figs). These activity codes also appear marginally more frequently deployed by those institutes of the NIH that disproportionally enrich for early-stage research (Mann-Whitney U: 0.05) (S10B Fig). Among these 8 activity codes, 3 relate to NIH's intramural research program (N01, ZIA, ZIB), 2 relate to research activities funded through contracts rather than research grants (U01, Z01), another relates to funding directed toward the career development of PostDocs (F32), and another is directed toward supporting high impact interdisciplinary science (RC2). The last activity code supporting publications enriching for early-stage research is the R01, the most common activity code (S9 Fig) . While the enrichment is statistically significant for R01-type grants due to the very large number of observations, the magnitude of the enrichment is miniscule (6%). We thus conclude that only a minority of funding mechanisms preferentially supports early-stage research and that, essentially, only 2 of them correspond to funding that is allocated through extramural research grants.
Concluding our analysis of the research contexts under which early-stage research occurs, we investigate research organizations that are recipients of NIH grants (Fig 4B-4D, S11 Fig) . The strongest enrichments for early-stage research are seen in a group of smaller research organizations-namely Geisinger Health Systems, the New England Deaconess Hospital, and ratio) for the support of specific funding agencies in publications highlighting at least 1 recent gene target (first highlighted 1 to 5 years before). Each circle represents an individual journal; red (blue) circles indicate journals that significantly enrich (deplete) for publications on novel gene targets at Bonferroni multiple testing corrected Fisher exact test with p < 0.01. (B) Enrichment for author affiliation to research organizations in publications highlighting at least 1 recent gene target. (C) Comparison of fold enrichment for funding agencies that are significantly enriched or depleted for new gene targets or recent gene targets. (D) Comparison of fold enrichment for research organizations that are significantly enriched or depleted for new gene targets or recent gene targets. Note that for any given funding agency or research organization, the enrichment may not be statistically significant for both axes. Notably, the light cyan quadrant shows funding agencies and research organizations that are depleted from early-stage research. Combines data from MEDLINE, NCBI gene and taxonomy information, gene2pubmed, PubTator, and ExPORTER. For data underlying the figure, see https://doi.org/10.21985/n2-b5bm-3b17.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3001520.g004
the Icelandic Heart Association. Manually inspecting their early-stage publications from 2010 onward, we see that each publication either describes a genome-wide association study, its verification, or a meta-analysis of association studies. Among the larger research organizations, we see (filed under 2 different names) the University of Washington, which historically played a prominent role in the Human Genome Project [49] , and the Broad Institute, which, according to its mission statement, "was founded in 2004 to fulfill the promise of genomic medicine" [50] . Complementing above research organizations, we also see the intramural branch of the NIH's NHGRI and NIA. Our unbiased analysis of publication outlets, funding agencies, and research organizations thus all point toward genome biology as disproportionally promoting early-stage research into human genes.
Given the prominence of genome biology among scientific journals, funding agencies, and research organizations that produce or support publications that enrich for early-stage research, we next set out to quantify the extent to which the field of genome biology contributes to early-stage research into human genes. We classify publications as genome biology according to their title, abstract, and keyword sections as described in detail in our Methods section.
We observe that genome biology becomes identifiable as a field in the 1980s. Since the 2010s, it directly accounts for 49% of the early-stage publications on novel human genes ( Fig  5A) -with this share having increased even further to 58% in 2018, the last year of our observation (S12 Fig). To understand how novel gene targets are first highlighted outside of publications on genome biology, we randomly select and manually review 20 such publications from 2015 and 2018 that were classified as not belonging to genome biology. We find that 12 of the 20 research publications use sequence similarities to other genes to select the gene which they would subsequently highlight in their own title or abstract (e.g., by using sequence similarity to define and/or find genes belonging to an acknowledged gene family), 2 build upon earlier work in mice, 1 identifies the new gene target through differential mass spectrometry, 1 identifies the new gene target through a functional cDNA screen, and 1 investigates the genes residing at a multigenic locus. Three research articles contain genes that were highlighted before but were missed by our pipeline (Fig 5B) . We conclude that-extending beyond our definition of genome biology-several publications on new gene targets presently use information about genomes to identify their targets.
Previously, we observed that early-stage research into genes engages more authors, highlights more genes, and is more likely to receive a higher number of citations (Fig 2) . To distinguish whether these bibliometric properties characterize early-stage research per se or just those falling under genome biology, we repeat the earlier analyses while distinguishing between genome biology publications and nongenome biology publications. We provide details about each decade and rank-based comparisons in S13 and S14 Figs, but focus our discussion here on the most recent period: 2010 and 2018.
We recognize that the previously noted increase in team size for early-stage research (Fig  2A) stems from genome biology (Fig 5C) . By contrast, the previously noted increase in the number of highlighted genes (Fig 2B) also persists outside of genome biology (Fig 5D) but is twice as large for genome biology, while publications on old gene targets highlight the same number of genes irrespectively of whether they fall within genome biology or not (Fig 5D) . The previously noted increased probability for early-stage research to become highly cited ( Fig  2C) appears independent of genome biology (Fig 5E) . However, genome biology publications on old gene targets are also more frequently highly cited (Fig 5E) .
We conclude that the bibliometric properties that characterize early-stage research are more pronounced within genome biology but-with the exception of team size-remain valid within nongenome biology publications.
We also noted that genome-wide association studies seem to be common among studies describing early-stage research. We thus perform bibliometric analyses that focus on genome research, but then distinguish between genome-wide association studies (including transcriptome-wide association studies) and other genome research. We find that the previously noted increase of in team size for early-stage research only holds to a notable extent for genome-wide association studies (S15 Fig). We also find that early-stage research on genome research outside of genome-wide association studies shows an increase that is smaller than the one that we had observed before for genome research (Fig 5D, S15 Fig) and that the increase of the probability to become highly cited of approximately 4% closely matches the probability seen for the 
The characteristics of early-stage research into human genes are different from subsequent research entire genome research (Fig 5E, S16 Fig) . By contrast, the latter increase is small when compared to genome-wide association studies, where the chance to be among the 5% most cited publications of a year nearly doubles from approximately 30% for research on old gene targets to around approximately 55% for research on novel gene targets (S16 Fig). We conclude that some of our insights about the intersection between genome research and early-stage research could stem from a very specific domain of genome research. In line with the overall theme of our work, this further indicates the necessity and possibility to identify the specific contexts behind early-stage research as some beliefs about innovation might not generalize.
While approaches used within genome biology are well positioned to identify novel gene targets [29] (Fig 5A) , we previously observed that early-stage research on recent gene targets differs from early-stage research on novel gene targets by further extending to journals dedicated to neurobiology and obesity (Fig 3) . This prompts us to ask whether recent gene targets that are of interest to specific domains of biology become the focus of greater interest than other recent gene targets.
We again focus here on the period of 2010 to 2018 for timeliness, but similar analyses for other periods are included in S17 Fig. During this time period, we find that 3,943 newly highlighted genes could have been investigated as recent gene targets (Fig 1A) . A total of 1,656 (42%) were never highlighted during the same time period, and 885 (22%) are highlighted only once more. By contrast, and supporting our hypothesis, we find that a small number of recent gene targets become the focus of dramatically greater interest. Specifically, the 40 top ranked genes represent a little over 1% of the newly highlighted genes, but 21% of all unique pairs of recent gene targets and publications (Fig 6A, S17 Fig) .
This small subset of top ranked recently highlighted genes defies the general trend of biomedical research rarely turning to new gene targets (Fig 1B and 1C, S3 Fig) [14] . By contrast, this unusual group of 40 genes (0.2% of all 19,171 human protein-coding genes) have already been highlighted in more publications than most human genes ( Fig 6B) . The most frequently highlighted genes within this group are FTO, C9orf72, and PALB2. By 2018, they had been highlighted in the title and abstract of more publications than 98%, 97%, and 94%, respectively, of protein-coding genes. These 3 genes strongly associate with obesity [51] , dementia [52, 53] , and cancer [54, 55] , respectively. Interestingly, while FTO and C9orf72 were initially discovered through genome-wide association studies (and thus through genome biology), PALB2 was initially discovered through its biochemical interaction with BRCA2, a prominent cancer gene [56] . These results highlight the potential biological importance of novel gene targets and the potential to become heavily investigated within a few years.
Finally, we return to our observation of neurological and obesity-related journals enriching for early-stage gene targets to an extent that exceeds their enrichment on novel gene targets (10 journals above dashed line, Fig 3C) . Plotting the share of their targets which fall onto the 40 top ranked genes, we find that it ranges between 32% and 100% and thus significantly exceeds share observed among other journals that enrich for recent gene targets (Fig 6C) . To identify whether these journals focus on similar gene targets, we next cluster these journals according to the subset (15) of the 40 top ranked genes that have been highlighted by them at least once (Fig 6D) . We recognize 3 groups. Seven journals-all dedicated to neurology-primarily include C9orf72 as a recent gene target. Two journals about obesity primarily include FTO as a research target, and to a lesser extent, 5 other genes linked to obesity [57] . Finally, one cluster is formed by a single journal about vision, which primarily highlights ARMS2-a gene implicated in age-related maculopathy. If we remove the 40 top ranked genes from our analysis, only 2 of these journals (Brain and Obesity) remain enriched for recent gene targets. In summary, we conclude that domain-specific research can contribute to early-stage research, but primarily does so through a handful of genes. . The x-axis ranks genes by number of publications highlighting them, with rank 0 corresponding to the gene highlighted in the most publications. The y-axis tallies the percentage of all pairs of highlighted genes and 2010 to 2018 publications highlighting recent gene targets with a lower or equal rank. We emphasize in orange the top 1% genes (40 genes), which together account for 21% of all pairs. Note that for simplicity of data representation, we allow for overlapping and shifting time windows. For example, a gene that has been first highlighted 5 years prior the start the indicated decade would will only be represented by a single year in our analysis. Journals are considered to disproportionally enrich for recent gene targets if they enrich for recent gene targets at least twice as much as they enrich for novel gene targets (above dashed line in Fig 3C) . (D) Different top 40 genes are highlighted in publications from journals dedicated to different fields. The heatmap plot shows the percentage of publications highlighting a given recently highlighted gene from among all publications in the given journal. Shown are journals that highlight recent gene targets and enrich for recent gene targets at least twice as much as they enrich for novel gene targets (above dashed line in Fig 3C) . Genes and journals are ordered and grouped using Ward clustering. Combines data from MEDLINE, NCBI gene and taxonomy information, gene2pubmed, and PubTator. For data underlying the figure, see https://doi.org/10.21985/n2-b5bm-3b17.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3001520.g006
We recognize that our investigation into early-stage research of human genes of the past 50 years cannot be separated from contemporary scientific research. We believe that we have identified a few specific ways in which contemporary scientific research shaped our findings. First, genes and their products are a primary focus of life scientists [25] . Second, our perspective toward genes follows the paradigms accepted by most US-based life scientists in 2021. Third, results in the scientific literature can be forgotten, and our analyses must be limited to those results that can be found in present day bibliometric resources. Fourth, the computational approaches to understand science likely do not capture all aspects of science and are biased toward entities that are easy to measure.
In addition to above general limitations, we also note that much of our investigation relies on individual research publications and note that life scientists frequently treat "research articles" synonymously with "research publications." Likewise, much of the scientometric literature focuses on research articles and measures success through peer recognition. Despite being prevalent, easily understandable, and a guide for some of our own analyses, such a view might be myopic as independent reevaluations of the data underlying research articles can be a valid and successful research strategy [58] .
Moreover, we recognize that even on old gene targets, novel scientific findings can be made and that novel combinations of old scientific ideas can constitute innovation [35] . For instance, a novel connection between an old gene target and a previous unconnected disease could be just as impactful as an association between a disease and a novel gene target. Similarly, our study cannot provide direct guidance on what would be the most appropriate ratio between early-stage research and other modes of science.
Our analysis into the conditions surrounding early-stage research into human genes shows the need to be cautious when attempting to apply insights obtained from broad studies of innovation to narrower fields of science or research targets. Despite this need for caution, our study also demonstrates that it is possible to identify and quantify the contribution of individual research contexts toward innovation. An example of this is our finding that a discovery on a single gene (C9orf72) could be sufficient to lead to an extraordinary extent of innovation within neurobiology.
We find a set of journals and institutions that support research on novel gene targets and an even broader set that supports research into recent gene targets. As such, our findings are consistent, albeit in a more optimistic fashion, with the notion by de Grazia that scientific journals primarily serve individual communities of researchers and thereby develop "orthodox views . . . and that their receptivity to new ideas is variable" [45, 46] . Specifically, we see that it is possible for some communities to become more receptive (such as genome research, andcurrently-investigators of age-related neuropathies). Further, interdisciplinary journals, which avoid de Grazia's notion, support early-stage research to a larger extent. This demonstrates that journal policies can promote some forms of novelty. Last, the association between grants for postdoctoral researchers and early-stage research (S9 Fig) could hint at an opportunity for young scholars to build novel research communities around those domains of biomedical research that have a large potential to grow while avoiding direct competition with established senior investigators.
Our finding that grants for postdoctoral scholars promote innovation may align well with the approach of funding people rather than projects. This approach guides the Howard Hughes Medical Institute-one of the funding agencies we found to enrich for early-stage research (S4A Fig)- and has been suggested to be favorable toward scientific innovation [27, 59, 60] . Irrespective of the specific policy to be promoted, early career scientists would appear to constitute an interesting target for funding-based policy interventions as early advantages in funding amplify over the course of the subsequent years [61] .
Arguing against a straightforward dichotomy between people-and project-based funding, we found that project-based funding that is distributed through contracts also enriches for early-stage research to a similar extent as funding allocated through the Howard Hughes Medical Institute or grants of the NIH focused on postdoctoral scholars. In fact, most people-centered grants programs of the NIH enrich less for early-stage research on genes.
So, how could innovation in the research into human genes be promoted? Given our findings, it is tempting to suggest that greater investments in genome research would promote early-stage research. Yet, such a view is likely incomplete because innovation may be better viewed as a sequence of largely independent phases. Thus, the transitions between consecutive phases-rather than the innovativeness within individual phases-could determine the overall level of innovation. Plausibly, innovation in the research into human genes might be limited by barriers for the transitions between phases [11, 14] 
Supporting this view, the impact of genome-wide association studies on future research seems to be presently decreasing [62] . Efforts to promote the transition between early-stage research and subsequent research exist [10] , but receive little financial support compared to other research [63] . Further, publicizing research opportunities might even discourage innovation by discouraging researchers from investigating these research opportunities because of the risk of being outcompeted by other researchers [64] . This study shows that successful transitions between early-stage research and subsequent research are not driven by any specific community (Fig 6) . Rather, different scientific communities will respond to findings concerning novel gene targets. Whereas the small number of such successful transitions will preclude statistical analyses like those presented in this manuscript, we think that our identification of these successful transitions could allow for insight to be gained through focused historical and social studies.
The half-a-century view afforded by our analysis also demonstrates that even within a single scientific domain (research about human genes), specific findings about innovation can change over the course of a few decades. Therefore, continued efforts, and reanalyses of past studies with current data, might be needed to ensure that their insights are applicable to current day science. Opposing temporal and country-specific trends for a single domain of biology (such as cancer research) might even provide opportunity to identify processes underlying shifting policies. For instance, one may hypothesize that for some domains of biomedical research a focus on well-characterized genes could become desirable if meaningful societal impact stems from translational research, early diagnosis, or disease prevention [65] .
Similarly, we do not dare to forecast whether genome-wide association studies will continue to be prominent among early-stage research. We envision at least 2 alternative, complementary directions, which stem from technology that currently gains popularity independent of early-stage research, but would appear to be particularly well positioned to prompt the investigation of novel gene targets. First, genes with expression patterns that are tissue or cell type specific remain little characterized [11] . Promisingly, single-cell transcriptomic approaches would seem well positioned to provide insight into the function of these genes and identify cell populations where those genes could be of physiological relevance. Second, current insight into physiology appears to primarily reflect top-down approaches (e.g., where a phenotype of interest is known but underlying factors might not be known), whereas bottom-up approaches seem risky as there could be myriad possibilities on what a given gene might do, and many of these possibilities may not be very interesting. However, computational predictions of protein structures are already extending toward multimers and complexes [66, 67] , and therefore, it might be within sight a time when the binding potentials of all pairs of proteins will be known. Genome-wide structural bottom-up approaches would seem ideally positioned to answer whether uncharacterized and novel gene targets are part of known complexes or hint at novel aspects of biology.
Our analysis also foreshadows that innovative research into human genes will soon no longer be appraisable through the novelty of its gene targets. Ultimately, we are reminded of de Solla Price's observation that future trajectories of scientific disciplines seem uncertain once these fields will have slowed down their growth [15] . He noted that these trajectories could range from alternating short phases of growth and recession to the disappearance of the scientific field or their stagnation. Consequently, research into genes and their molecular products might be headed toward turbulent times.
Aside from some important but rare exceptions [52, 53, 57] (Fig 6) , the wealth of unbiased data that has already been accumulated through genome biology currently stands in stark contrast to the genes that are presently chosen for consistent-or even insistent-investigation by life scientists [11, 14, 24] . We thus anticipate that domain-specific scientists-but also the funding agencies, research organizations, and foundations supporting their work-will all increasingly need to revisit the research patterns within their domains to better justify their research to the public. We hope that an improved and more specific understanding of early-stage research will help to create ideas and hypotheses on how to counter unintended patterns of scientific inquiry.
Publication dates, journal names, titles, abstracts, author-provided keywords, MeSH terms, number of authors, funders, and publication types were obtained from MEDLINE through the PubMed baseline files downloaded on October 21, 2020 from https://www.nlm.nih.gov/ databases/download/pubmed_medline.html and subsequently parsed through PubMed Parser 0.2.2 [68] .
Out of all 30,419,065 publications that we retrieved, we excluded 18 publications because the PubMed ID was duplicated. We further removed 1,334,568 publications published after 2018 before filtering our data further as described below to identify the publications with human protein-coding genes in their title or abstract.
Genes in titles or abstracts were obtained through PubTator [69] . Specifically, we downloaded https://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub/lu/PubTatorCentral on October 22, 2020 and used the therein contained offsets of recognized entities (such as genes) to locate whether they fall into the title or abstract. We excluded ambiguously mapped entities indicated by an ";" operator in PubTator.
To 
To trace early-stage research into human protein-coding genes, we will follow genes that are referred to by their names in the titles and abstracts of scientific publications. This choice is motivated by pragmatic and scientific reasons. First, titles and abstracts are broadly available and accessible to computational approaches. Second, scientific authors take great care while preparing those section of scientific publications [70] , whereas readers have been advised to quickly read these sections prior to committing to reading the entire scientific publication [71] . We therefore surmise that the genes mentioned within the title or abstract have been highlighted by the authors and are considered by them to be related to the most important research results reported in the scientific publication.
We acknowledge that past scientific literature can become detached from future literature [72] and that throughout the past 50 years, the concept of genes has itself remained subjected to variable definitions that extended into efforts of distinct groups of scientists to claim how and when genes should be named [73] [74] [75] [76] [77] . While we believe that those matters warrant continued historical studies, we will, for the present manuscript, sidestep them in a formalized manner by restricting our inquiry to present day indices of scientific literature and genes, which the National Library of Medicine and the National Center for Biotechnology Information of the US offer to life scientists as references for the biomedical literature and genes. Consequently, we would like to caution readers of this manuscript that our investigation into the conditions surrounding early-stage research into human protein-coding during the past 50 years will adopt a selective and gene-centric perspective that is possibly biased toward the perspective of American life scientists of 2021 (see "Study limitations" section).
AU : PleaseconsiderrephrasingthesentenceWeusegene2pubmed½78�torestrict:::forclarity:
We first use gene2pubmed [78] to identify scientific publications on human genes. Next we use PubTator [69] to identify genes within the title or abstract of those publications. We end our analysis in 2018 as more recent publications appear to not have yet been fully indexed by gene2pubmed.
Overall, we consider 485,800 PubMed scientific publications that yield 1,265,150 unique genes-article pairs. A total of 61% of all publications only highlight 1 or 2 genes, and no publication highlights more than 56 genes (S1A Fig). We manually reviewed 100 randomly sampled scientific publications for correctness of gene-publication pairs and find a false-positive rate of 5%. We additionally manually reviewed 50 randomly sampled scientific publications that were annotated by gene2pubmed for human genes but for which there were no highlighted genes according to PubTator and found 19 true false negatives. Notably, for the latter analysis, we only consider publications of gene2pubmed linked to protein-coding genes, the focus of our investigation-thereby slightly reducing the overall number of publications (to 473,477). Extrapolating the 19 true false negatives to the 98,803 scientific publications of the 572,280 publications of gene2pubmed showing no overlap between gene2pubmed and PubTator, we estimate an upper boundary for the false-negative rate in identifying highlighted genes to be below 11%. We conclude that our approach captures most human genes highlighted in the titles or abstracts of indexed research publications and provides for high-quality data for this study.
To investigate the extent to which our investigation of past research is constrained by present day life sciences knowledge, we randomly select for each decade 10 genes that had not been highlighted prior to that decade and performed a manual literature review for those genes (S1B Fig). Prior to 2000, we encounter a large degree of ambiguity in the names of genes.
We classify a naming situation as "misty" if we find that heritable traits, symptoms, enzymatic activities, mutants, biochemical affinities, clone identifiers, domains, cosegregation, partial sequence information, or loci relating to these genes have been named in titles or abstracts before, but that those related entities have-in contrast to such entities relating to other genes -neither become a preserved or accepted namesake or synonym of the respective genes. Additionally, we observe 4 cases where our approach "missed" a preceding highlighting of a gene. One case is due to a misattribution of the gene to another species by gene2pubmed, and 2 other cases stem from PubTator not indexing the publications, and the final case stems from PubTator not having detected the gene. Reassuringly, in all these cases, the research publications identified by our pipeline still describe early-stage research that either established or manifested the existence of these genes or established them to exist as entities that are separate from other genes.
Further, we encounter 4 cases that we classify as "missed by name" where multiple genes shared a name or the name of one gene became part of the name of another gene. Also, in these cases, at least 1 of the highlighted genes may be classified as being in early stages of investigation, although some of these cases retain further ambiguity. For instance, PubTator highlights "transferrin" in a research publication about "transferrin receptor." Transferrin had already been known at the time, but its gene had not yet been cloned.
We considered NCBI gene info (https://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/DATA/gene_info.gz) downloaded on June 21, 2020, homologene build 68 (https://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub/ HomoloGene/build68), and NCBI taxonomy (https://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub/taxonomy) downloaded on June 30, 2020.
We considered pLI scores above 0.9 within the intolerances published by Karczewski and colleagues [32] .
For human phenotypes, we used the NHGRI-EBI catalog of genome-wide association studies [34] (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/gwas) downloaded on May 9, 2021.
For mouse phenotypes, we used IMPC release 13.0 [33] (https://www.mousephenotype. org/data/previous-releases/13.0).
Analysis was performed in sciPy v.1.4 [79] .
Specific metrics are given in figure legends and https://doi.org/10.21985/n2-b5bm-3b17, which also details the specific way we obtained confidence interval to indicate the robustness of our findings.
We performed no further sensitivity analysis and note that conveyed confidence intervals depend upon the inherent variability within a group and the number of publications in that group. As the number of publications has been increasing over recent decades, our approach should be more sensitive for more recent decades.
Data was visualized through seaborn 0.11 [80] .
For relative and relational citation data, we used iCite Version 10 [81] . We defined studies as belonging to a clinical trial if their publication type on PubMed would contain "clinical trial" in a case-insensitive manner.
We downloaded public funding information, including funding activity codes, and supported research organizations and the mapping between publications and research grants through NIH's https://exporter.nih.gov on November 3, 2020.
We considered a publication to be genome biology if title, abstract, author-submitted keywords, or MeSH terms contained one of the following phrases in a case-insensitive manner. Their selection follows a manually supervised identification of terms that are enriched to cooccur with genomics and/or which we spotted in review articles on genomics.
chip seq, chip sequencing, chip-chip, chip-seq, chip-sequencing, chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing, clinicogenomic, clinicogenomics, clip seq, clip seq, clip sequencing, clip sequencing, clip-seq, clip-seq, clip-sequencing, clip-sequencing, epigenome, epigenomes, epigenomic, epigenomics, eqtl, eqtls, exome, expression quantitative trait loci, ewas, genome, genome-scale, genome-wide, genomes, genomic, genomics, glycome, glycomes, glycomics, glycoproteome, glycoproteomes, glycoproteomic, glycoproteomics, gwas, highthroughput nucleotide sequencing, hits seq, hits sequencing, hits-seq, hits-sequencing, in situ proximity ligation, in-situ proximity ligation, interactome, interactomes, interactomic, interactomics, metabolome, metabolomes, metabolomic, metabolomics, metagenome, metagenomes, metagenomics, microarray, microarrays, multi-ome, multi-omes, multi-omic, multiomics, multiome, multiomes, multiomic, multiomics, next generation sequencing, next generation-sequencing, next-generation sequencing, next-generation-sequencing, ngs, nutrigenome, nutrigenomes, nutrigenomic, nutrigenomics, oligonucleotide array sequence analysis, omics, onco-genome, onco-genomes, onco-genomics, onco-genomics, onco-proteogenome, onco-proteogenomes, onco-proteogenomic, onco-proteogenomics, oncogenome, oncogenomes, oncogenomics, oncogenomics, oncoproteogenome, oncoproteogenomes, oncoproteogenomic, oncoproteogenomics, par-clip, pharmacogenome, pharmacogenomes, pharmacogenomic, pharmacogenomics, phenome, phenomes, phenomic, phenomics, phosphoproteome, phosphoproteomes, phosphoproteomic, phosphorpoteomics, protein array, protein array analysis, protein interaction map, protein interaction mapping, protein interaction maps, protein interaction network, protein interaction networks, protein-protein interaction map, protein-protein interaction mapping, protein-protein interaction maps, proteinprotein interaction network, protein-protein interaction networks, proteogenome, proteogenomes, proteogenomic, proteogenomics, proteome, proteomes, proteomic, proteomics, radiogenome, radiogenomes, radiogenomic, radiogenomics, rna seq, rna sequencing, rna-seq, rnasequencing, rnaseq, toxicogenome, toxicogenomes, toxicogenomic, toxicogenomics, transcriptome, transcriptomes, transcriptomic, transcriptomics, wes, wgs, whole-exome, wholegenome.
We considered a publication to be a genome-wide association study if it carried the MeSH term D055106 (which corresponds to genome-wide association studies) or if the publication appeared in the NHGRI-EBI catalog of genome-wide association studies [34] or if title, abstract, or author-submitted keywords contained one of the following phrases in a caseinsensitive manner:
gwas, genome wide association study, genome-wide association study, GWA study, gwa studies, whole genome association study, genome wide association scan, genome wide association analysis, genome-wide association scan, genome-wide association analysis, twas, transcriptome wide association study, transcriptome-wide association study, twa study, twa studies, whole transcriptome association study, transcriptome wide association scan, transcriptome wide association analysis, transcriptome-wide association scan, transcriptome-wide association analysis. For each decade, we randomly selected 10 genes that our automated approach did not identify as being highlighted by name in the title or abstract prior to the year of the oldest automatically identified publication. We mark in yellow "clear cases," where past nomenclature aligns with today's nomenclature and for which we could not find any preceding highlighting. We mark in gray "foggy cases," where we found that entities related to those genes (e.g., symptoms, enzymatic activities,. . .) had been highlighted before, but-in contrast to some other genes-are not currently accepted as namesakes or synonyms of these genes by NCBI Gene. We mark in pink "missed by name cases," where the gene highlighted in a publication was misattributed because the 2 genes either swapped names later or the name of one gene became part of the name of the other gene. Finally, we mark in black "missed cases," where an earlier highlighting of the genes was missed by our automated computational approach. Combines data from MEDLINE, NCBI gene and taxonomy information, gene2pubmed, and PubTator. [34] . Note that C and D show 95% confidence intervals inferred by bootstrap of the genes but that bootstrap only has minimal effect on the enrichment. Combines data from MEDLINE, NCBI gene and taxonomy information, gene2pubmed, PubTator, Karczewski and colleagues [32] , IMPC [33] , and NHGRI-EBI GWAS catalog. Plots within the left column focus on publications that highlight at least 1 new gene that had not been highlighted in any preceding year (0-year genes), whereas plots within the right column focus on publications that highlight at least 1 gene that was recently highlighted for the first time (1-to 5-year genes). In each plot, we compare the number of publications acknowledging funding from a given agency highlighting at least 1 new or recent gene against the total number of other publications acknowledging funding from the same agency. Each circle represents a funding agency acknowledged in a least 1 publication that highlighting at least 1 gene. Red (cyan) circles indicate funding agency significantly enriched (depleted) for respective early-stage research. Combines data from MEDLINE, NCBI gene and taxonomy information, gene2pubmed, PubTator, and ExPORTER. (PDF) S9 Fig. Identification of activity codes from NIH funding that associate with early-stage research by decade of publication. Plots within the left column focus on publications that highlight at least 1 new gene that had not been highlighted in any preceding year (0-year genes), whereas plots within the right column focus on publications that highlight at least 1 gene that was recently highlighted for the first time (1-to 5-year genes). In each plot, we compare the number of publications acknowledging funding from a given activity code highlighting at least 1 new or recent gene against the total number of other publications acknowledging funding from the same activity. Each circle represents an activity code for NIH funding acknowledged in a least 1 publication that highlighting at least 1 gene. Red (cyan) circles indicate activity codes significantly enriched (depleted) for respective early-stage research. Combines data from MEDLINE, NCBI gene and taxonomy information, gene2pubmed, and PubTator. For data underlying the figure, see https://doi.org/10.21985/n2-b5bm-3b17. NIH, National Institutes of Health. (PDF) S10 Fig. Inspection of activity codes enriching for early-stage research. (A) Comparison of fold enrichment (log 2 of ratio) for activity codes from NIH funding that are significantly enriched or depleted for new gene targets or recent gene targets. Note that for any given activity code, the enrichment may not be statistically significant for both axes. (B) Box plot showing share of grants-measured through fiscal years (as grant durations can vary among activity codes)-that go toward enriched activity codes between 2010 and 2018 (salmon box of panel A) for NIH institutes that do not (no) or do (yes) enrich for early-stage research. p-Value is obtained by 2-sided Mann-Whitney U test. Combines data from MEDLINE, NCBI gene and taxonomy information, gene2pubmed, PubTator, and ExPORTER. For data underlying the figure, see https://doi.org/10.21985/n2-b5bm-3b17. NIH, National Institutes of Health. (PDF) S11 Fig. Identification of author institutional affiliations that associate with early-stage research by decade of publication. Plots within the left column focus on publications that highlight at least 1 new gene that had not been highlighted in any preceding year (0-year genes), whereas plots within the right column focus on publications that highlight at least 1 gene that was recently highlighted for the first time (1-to 5-year genes). In each plot, we compare the number of publications with at least 1 author affiliated with a given institution highlighting at least 1 new or recent gene against the total number of other publications with at least 1 author affiliated with the same institution. Each circle represents an institution associated with at least 1 publication that highlighting at least 1 gene. Red Note that the number of genes in the top 1% increases over time because so does the total number of gene highlighted in each period. (Left) Cumulative distribution of pairs of highlighted genes and publications in considered period highlighting recent gene targets (first highlighted 1 to 5 years before). The x-axis ranks genes by number of publications highlighting them, with rank 0 corresponding to the gene highlighted in the most publications within a given decade. The y-axis tallies the percentage of all pairs of highlighted genes in publications in considered period highlighting recent gene targets with a lower or equal rank. We emphasize in orange the top 1% genes which together account for over 15% of all pairs. (Right) Letter plots of all highlighted genes reporting for each gene the total number of publications until 2018 for genes that still were a recent target during the time period of the respective left panel with top 1% genes in orange and other 99% gene in orange. 
